[Vega] Write tutorials and reference (#71028)
elastic/kibana: docs/visualize/vega.asciidoc

experimental[]

Build custom visualizations using Vega and Vega-Lite, backed by one or more
data sources including {es}, Elastic Map Service, URL,
or static data. Use the {kib} extensions to Vega to embed Vega into
your dashboard, and to add interactivity to the visualizations.

Vega and Vega-Lite are both declarative formats to create visualizations
using JSON. Vega-Lite is an easier format to use that compiles into Vega.

[float]
[[when-to-vega]]
=== When to use Vega

Vega and Vega-Lite are capable of building most of the visualizations
that {kib} provides, but with higher complexity. The most common reason
to use Vega in {kib} is that your data or

> visualization isn't supported in other tools in {kib}, especially

Author: Done

in these cases:

* Aggregations using the `nested` mapping
* Aggregations with bucket scripts
* Queries using that custom time filters
* Complex calculations
* Calculating percentage changes
* Extracting data from _source instead of aggregation
* Scatter charts
* Sankey charts
* Custom maps
* Using a visual theme that {kib} does not provide

> Because Vega supports all of these, it is often easier to write a Vega spec

Author: Done

a stacked area chart from an {es} search query. It will give you a starting point
for a more comprehensive
https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/tutorials/getting_started.html[introduction to Vega-Lite],
while only covering the basics.

When you first open the Vega editor in {kib}, you will see a pre-populated
line chart which shows the total number of documents across all your indices
within the time range.

[role="screenshot"]
image::visualize/images/vega_lite_default.png[]

In this tutorial, you will build a stacked area chart from one of the {kib} sample data
sets:

[role="screenshot"]
image::visualize/images/vega_lite_tutorial_1.png[]

The text editor contains a Vega-Lite spec written in https://hjson.github.io/[HJSON],
which is similar to JSON but optimized for human editing. HJSON supports:

* Comments using // or /* syntax
* Object keys without quotes
* String values without quotes
* Optional commas
* Double or single quotes
* Multiline strings

[float]
==== Small steps

Always work on Vega in the smallest steps possible, and save your work frequently.
Small changes will cause unexpected results. Click the "Save" button now.

> The first step is to change the index to one of the <<add-sample-data, sample data>>

Author: Done

      %timefield%: order_date
      index: kibana_sample_data_ecommerce
      body: {
        aggs: {
          categories: {
            terms: { field: "category.keyword" }
            aggs: {
              time_buckets: {
                date_histogram: {
                  field: order_date
                  interval: {%autointerval%: true}
                  extended_bounds: {
                    min: {%timefilter%: "min"}
                    max: {%timefilter%: "max"}
                  }
                  min_doc_count: 0
                }
              }
            }
          }
        }
        size: 0
      }
    }
    format: {property: "aggregations.categories.buckets" }
  }
```

If you copy and paste that into your Vega-Lite spec, and click "Update",
you will see a warning saying `Infinite extent for field "key": [Infinity, -Infinity]`.
Let's use our Vega debugging skills to understand why.

Open the browser dev tools console and type
`VEGA_DEBUG.view.data('source_0')`. You will see:

```js
[{
  doc_count: 454
  key: "Men's Clothing"
  time_buckets: {buckets: Array(57)}
  Symbol(vega_id): 12822
}, ...]
```

Open the browser dev tools console and type

> `VEGA_DEBUG.view.data('data_0')`. You will see:

Author: Done

    range: height
    domain: {
      data: source_0
      field: doc_count
    }
  }]
```

Click "Update", and you will see that the X and Y axes are now showing labels based
on the real data.

Next, encode the fields `key` and `doc_count` as the X and Y values:

```yaml
  marks: [{
    type: area
    from: {
      data: source_0
    }
    encode: {
      update: {
        x: {
          scale: x
          field: key
        }
        y: {
          scale: y
          value: 0
        }
        y2: {
          scale: y
          field: doc_count
        }
      }
    }
  }]
```

Click "Update" and you will get a basic area chart:

[role="screenshot"]
image::visualize/images/vega_tutorial_3.png[]

Next, add a new block to the `marks` section. This will show clickable points to filter for a specific
date:

```yaml
  {
    name: point
    type: symbol
    style: ["point"]
    from: {
      data: source_0
    }
    encode: {
      update: {
        x: {
          scale: x
          field: key
        }
        y: {
          scale: y
          field: doc_count
        }
        size: {
          value: 100
        }
        fill: {
          value: black
        }
      }
    }

>   }]

Reviewer: This snippet does not contain the opening `[`, so we should remove the `]` here.

Author: Done

               invert('x',selected[0]),
               invert('x',selected[1])) : null'''
      }]
    }
  ]
}

----
====

[[vega-reference]]
=== Reference for {kib} extensions

{kib} has extended Vega and Vega-Lite with extensions that support:

* Default height and width
* Default theme to match {kib}
* Writing {es} queries using the time range and filters from dashboards
* Using the Elastic Map Service in Vega maps
* Additional tooltip styling
* Advanced setting to enable URL loading from any domain
* Limited debugging support using the browser dev tools
* (Vega only) Expression functions which can update the time range and dashboard filters

[[vega-sizing-and-positioning]]
==== Default height and width

By default, Vega visualizations use the `autosize = { type: 'fit', contains: 'padding' }` layout.
`fit` uses all available space, ignores `width` and `height` values,
and respects the padding values. To override this behavior, change the
`autosize` value.

[[vega-theme]]
==== Default theme to match {kib}

{kib} registers a default https://vega.github.io/vega/docs/schemes/[Vega color scheme]
with the id `elastic`, and sets a default color for each `mark` type.

> Override it by providing an alternate

Reviewer: The end of this sentence is somehow missing.

Author: Done

[[vega-queries]]
==== Writing {es} queries in Vega

experimental[] {kib} extends the Vega https://vega.github.io/vega/docs/data/[data] elements
with support for direct {es} queries specified as a `url`.

Because of this, {kib} is **unable to support dynamically loaded data**,
which would otherwise work in Vega. All data is fetched before it's passed to
the Vega renderer.

To define an {es} query in Vega, set the `url` to an object. {kib} will parse
the object looking for special tokens that allow your query to integrate with {kib}.
These tokens are:

* `%context%: true`: Set at the top level, and replaces the `query` section with filters from dashboard
* `%timefield%: <name>`: Set at the top level, integrates the query with the dashboard time filter
* `{%timefilter%: true}`: Replaced by an {es} range query with upper and lower bounds
* `{%timefilter%: "min" | "max"}`: Replaced only by the upper or lower bounds
* `{%timefilter: true, shift: -1, unit: 'hour'}`: Generates a time range query one hour in the past

> * `{%autointerval%: true}`: Replaced by the string representing the time interval, such as `1h`

Reviewer: Suggestion: Let's clarify a bit more what "the time interval" means here, e.g. something like "Replaced by a string representing a reasonable sized interval, for most charts over time" (I don't like my version of this sentence, but something along those lines, maybe).

Author: Done

experimental[]

> Build custom visualizations using Vega and Vega-Lite, backed by any

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Build custom visualizations using Vega and Vega-Lite, backed by one or more
```

data source including {es}, Elastic Map Service, URL,
or static data. Use the {kib} extensions to Vega to embed Vega into
your dashboard, and to add interactivity to the visualizations.

Vega and Vega-Lite are both declarative formats to create visualizations
using JSON. Vega-Lite is an easier format to use that compiles into Vega.

[float]
[[when-to-vega]]
=== When to use Vega

Vega and Vega-Lite are capable of building most of the visualizations
that {kib} provides, but with higher complexity. The most common reason
to use Vega in {kib} is that your data or
visualization isn't supported in other tools in {kib}, so you need

> to use the more powerful tool. The most common reasons to use Vega in {kib} are:

Reviewer 2: duplicate "the most common reason" here and a few lines above.

When you first open the Vega editor in {kib}, you will see a pre-populated
line chart which shows the total number of documents across all your indices
within the time range.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/vega_lite_default.png[]

This tutorial will show you how to build a stacked area chart, and how to debug
the most common issues when writing a visualization in Vega:

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/vega_lite_tutorial_1.png[]

The text editor contains a Vega-Lite spec written in https://hjson.github.io/[HJSON],
which is similar to JSON but optimized for human editing. HJSON supports:

* Comments using // or /* syntax
* Object keys without quotes
* String values without quotes
* Optional commas
* Double or single quotes

Multiline strings are supported in HJSON, but will not work as expected in Vega.

The default Vega-Lite spec is querying `_all` indices, but most visualizations are powered by a single index. Change the line:

```yaml
index: _all
```

to:

```yaml
index: kibana_sample_data_ecommerce
```

and click "Update". The result is probably not what you expect, because it shows
a flat line with 0 results. This shows the first thing that you need to understand

> when writing a Vega spec in {kib}: small changes can lead to unexpected results.

Reviewer 2: LOL :)  As a first lesson, I think we should rather add something like "baby steps - make sure to frequently refresh (i.e. Ctrl+Enter or auto-apply) - to see the result of each minor change". But I'm not too sure of how to phrase it, so maybe its ok to leave as is.

In this case, you've only changed the index, so the problem must be that the results
of your new query don't match what you expected. To debug this, you can use one of
these techniques:

* Use intuition to guess at the problem
* Open the browser dev tools and look at the Network tab to inspect the {es} request

> * Open the browser dev tools and type `VEGA_DEBUG.vegalite_spec.data` to inspect

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Open the browser dev tools console and type `VEGA_DEBUG.vegalite_spec.data` to inspect
```

    the response from {es}
* Build a comparable query using the {kib} Dev Tools and see if the results match

> * Copy the spec from `JSON.stringify(VEGA_DEBUG.vegalite_spec)` and paste into the

Reviewer 2: This should probably link to the vega editor?

    online Vega-Lite editor
* Use `VEGA_DEBUG.view.data('source_0')` or `VEGA_DEBUG.view.data('data_0')` to
    understand the transformations that are applied after fetching data

> This complex debugging process will come up frequently while working on Vega in {kib}.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should write "this complex debugging process" - no reason to scare people ahead of time ;)

leaving you with this spec:

.Expand Vega-Lite spec
[%collapsible%closed]
====
[source,yaml]
----
{
  $schema: https://vega.github.io/schema/vega-lite/v4.json
  title: Event counts from ecommerce
  data: {
    url: {
      %context%: true
      %timefield%: order_date
      index: kibana_sample_data_ecommerce
      body: {
        aggs: {
          time_buckets: {
            date_histogram: {
              field: order_date
              interval: {%autointerval%: true}
              extended_bounds: {
                min: {%timefilter%: "min"}
                max: {%timefilter%: "max"}
              }
              min_doc_count: 0
            }
          }
        }
        size: 0
      }
    }
    format: {property: "aggregations.time_buckets.buckets" }
  }

  mark: line

  encoding: {
    x: {
      field: key
      type: temporal
      axis: { title: null }
    }
    y: {
      field: doc_count
      type: quantitative
      axis: { title: "Document count" }
    }
  }
}
----

====

Now, let's make the visualization more interesting by adding another aggregation
to create a stacked area chart.

> Click the wrench icon and select "Reformat as JSON, strip comments". Now, open

Reviewer 2: why reformat?

      stack: true
    }
    color: {
      field: key
      type: nominal
      title: "Category"
    }
    tooltip: [{
      field: buckets.key
      type: temporal
      title: "Date"
    }, {
      field: key
      type: nominal
      title: "Category"
    }, {
      field: buckets.doc_count
      type: quantitative
      title: "Count"
    }]
  }
  
  layer: [{
    mark: area
  }, {
    mark: point
    
    selection: {
      pointhover: {
        type: single
        on: mouseover
        clear: mouseout
        empty: none
        fields: ["buckets.key", "key"]
        nearest: true
      }
    }

    encoding: {
      size: {
        condition: {
          selection: pointhover
          value: 100
        }
        value: 5
      }
      fill: {
        condition: {
          selection: pointhover
          value: white
        }
      }
    }
  }]
}
----

====

[[vega-tutorial]]
=== Tutorial: Updating {kib} filters from Vega

This tutorial will build on the Vega-Lite spec from the previous tutorial by
using the additional {kib} functions available in Vega to update {kib} filters.
These functions are only available in Vega specs, not in Vega-Lite, so the first

> step is to convert your visualization from Vega-Lite to Vega.

Reviewer 2: I don't think it's a good idea to use VegaLite->Vega conversion as the first tutorial. The resulting machine generated Vega spec is overly complex, and will confuse much more than help. I have never used this process when writing Vega specs because it is far easier to implement something from scratch than to try to understand the machine-generated Vega. My advice - try to implement a simple Vega graph that does something similar, without all the extra complexities.

      controlsLocation: top
      // Can be `vertical` or `horizontal` (default).
      controlsDirection: vertical
      // If true, hides most of Vega and Vega-Lite warnings
      hideWarnings: true
      // Vega renderer to use: `svg` or `canvas` (default)
      renderer: canvas
    }
  }
}
----

[[vega-notes]]
[[vega-useful-links]]
=== Resources and examples

experimental[] To learn more about Vega and Vega-Lite, refer to the resources and examples.

==== Vega editor
The https://vega.github.io/editor/[Vega Editor] includes examples for Vega & Vega-Lite, but does not support any
{kib}-specific features like {es} requests and interactive base maps.

==== Vega-Lite resources
* https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/tutorials/getting_started.html[Tutorials]
* https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/docs/[Docs]
* https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/examples/[Examples]

==== Vega resources
* https://vega.github.io/vega/tutorials/[Tutorials]
* https://vega.github.io/vega/docs/[Docs]
* https://vega.github.io/vega/examples/[Examples]

> TIP: When you use the examples, you may

Reviewer: Suggestion: "When you use the examples **in Kibana**, you may ..."

Author: Done
